PREAMBLE

In order to achieve increased independence for city government, and more power over local matters, the people of Pittsburgh adopt this home rule charter as an instrument of progress and hope.

It has been created in a long labor, open to all citizens and participated in by many.

The purpose of this charter is a responsible city. A responsible city is one which seeks to ensure that all of its citizens' needs are met, whether from public or private, city, county, state or national sources.

A responsible city is one which expects aggressive action from its officials toward the achievement of dignified housing, useful employment, pure air and water, efficient transportation excellent education, health, safety, recreation and culture, and the other conditions conducive to human growth.

It is one which provides equal protection of the law for all citizens, with no one denied the enjoyment of civil, economic or political rights, or discriminated against in the exercise thereof because of race, color, creed, national origin, age, handicap or sex.

It is one where all citizens have reasonable access to records and officials and where police power is under civil direction at all times.

It is one where citizens generously accept service in government, participate thoughtfully in public decisions, support public employees in the performance of lawful duties, avoid frivolous use of their rights and supply their government with sufficient resources to meet its responsibilities.

The achievement of the purpose of this home rule charter depends upon the constant interest and concern of citizens.

ARTICLE 1 - HOME RULE POWERS - DEFINITIONS

§ 101. - HOME RULE POWERS.
The City of Pittsburgh has all home rule powers and may perform any function and exercise any power not denied by the Constitution, the laws of Pennsylvania, or this charter whether such powers or functions are presently available to the City or may in the future become available. The powers of the City shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, and the specific mention of particular powers in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power stated in this article. All possible powers of the City, except as limited above, are to be considered as if expressly set forth in this article whether such powers are presently available to the City, or may in the future become available.

§ 102. - DEFINITION OF CERTAIN TERMS.
As used in this charter:

"Agencies" means authorities and also all organizations which receive city funds but are not a part of city government.

"Major Administrative Unit" means a subdivision of city government, whose head reports directly to the mayor, excluding boards, commissions and magistrate courts.

"Law" means the Pennsylvania Constitution or an act of the general assembly.

"Unit of Government" means any subdivision of city government including any department, bureau, division, board, commission or magistrate court.

§ 103. - BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of the City shall be the actual boundaries of the City at the time this charter takes effect, and as they may in the future be lawfully changed.

§ 104. - The City of Pittsburgh Bill of Rights.
a.Right to Water. All residents, natural communities, and ecosystems in Pittsburgh possess a fundamental and inalienable right to sustainably access, use, consume, and preserve water drawn from natural water cycles that provide water necessary to sustain life within the City.b.Rights of Natural Communities. Natural communities and ecosystems, including, but not limited to, wetlands, streams, rivers, aquifers, and other water systems, possess inalienable and fundamental rights to exist and flourish within the City of Pittsburgh. Residents of the City shall possess legal standing to enforce those rights on behalf of those natural communities and ecosystems.c.Right to a Sustainable Energy Future. All residents in the City of Pittsburgh possess a right to a sustainable energy future, which includes, but is not limited to, the development, production, and use of energy from renewable fuel sources.d.Right to Self-Government. All residents of Pittsburgh possess the fundamental and inalienable right to a form of governance where they live which recognizes that all power is inherent in the people, that all free governments are founded on the people's authority and consent, and that corporate entities and their directors and managers shall not enjoy special privileges or powers under the law which make community majorities subordinate to them.e.People as Sovereign. The City of Pittsburgh shall be the governing authority responsible to, and governed by, the residents of the City. Use of the "City of Pittsburgh" municipal corporation by the sovereign people of the City to make law shall not be construed to limit or surrender the sovereign authority or immunities of the people to a municipal corporation that is subordinate to them in all respects at all times. The people at all times enjoy and retain an inalienable and indefeasible right to self-governance in the community where they reside.f.Rights as Self-Executing. All rights delineated and secured by this Charter shall be self-executing and these rights shall be enforceable against corporations and governmental entities.g.Securing and Protecting Rights. To further secure and protect the rights enumerated by the Bill of Rights:1.It shall be unlawful for any corporation to engage in the extraction of natural gas within the City of Pittsburgh, with the exception of gas wells installed and operating at the time of enactment of this Charter provision, provided that the extraction of gas from those existing wells does not involve any practice or process not previously used for the extraction of gas from those wells.2.Corporations in violation of the prohibition against natural gas extraction, or seeking to engage in natural gas extraction shall not have the rights of "persons" afforded by the United States and Pennsylvania Constitutions, nor shall those corporations be afforded the protections of the commerce or contracts clauses within the United States Constitution or corresponding sections of the Pennsylvania Constitution.3.Corporations engaged in the extraction of natural gas shall not possess the authority or power to enforce State or federal preemptive law against the people of the City of Pittsburgh, or to challenge or overturn municipal ordinances or Charter provisions adopted by the City Council of Pittsburgh.4.No permit, license, privilege, or charter issued by any State or federal agency, Commission, or Board to any person or any corporation operating under a State charter, or any director, officer, owner, or manager of a corporation operating under a State charter, which would violate the prohibitions of this Charter provision or deprive any City resident(s), natural community, or ecosystem of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by this Charter, the Pennsylvania Constitution, the United States Constitution, or other laws, shall be deemed valid within the City of Pittsburgh.

ARTICLE 2 - EXECUTIVE BRANCH

§ 201. - THE MAYOR.
The executive, administrative and law enforcement powers of the City shall be vested in the mayor. The mayor shall control and be accountable for the executive branch of city government, as provided by this charter.

§ 202. - QUALIFICATIONS OF THE MAYOR.
The mayor shall have been a resident of the City for at least three years immediately preceding election, unless absent on the public business of the United States or this Commonwealth, and shall reside in the City while serving as mayor.

§ 203. - ELECTION AND TERM OF THE MAYOR.
The mayor shall be chosen by the qualified electors of the City at the municipal election, and shall serve for a term of four years from the first Monday of January following election until a successor is elected and qualified.

§ 204. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
The mayor shall have the following additional powers and duties:

a.to provide leadership for the advancement of the City and achievement of the goals set forth in the Preamble of this charter;b.to execute and enforce the provisions of this charter, the ordinances and resolutions of the City and the laws of this Commonwealth;c.to inform council at least once a year concerning the finances and general conditions of the City;d.to provide council with information concerning the administration and conditions of the City as requested by council;e.to call meetings with council when necessary;f.to submit proposed legislation to any member of council for introduction;g.to make long and short range plans for the improvement of the economic, physical and social condition of the City and its neighborhoods;h.to supervise all city employees and officers except as otherwise provided by this charter;i.to promote intergovernmental relations generally and specifically by:1.initiating as well as cooperating in working relationships with other governments, public and quasi-public agencies for the promotion of public services, economic development and cultural activities of mutual benefit to all concerned;2.aggressively seeking funds for city programs from federal, state and county sources;3.making periodic public reports on the current status of the City's present and prospective relations with other governments, public and quasi-public agencies;4.The mayor shall present an annual report on the tax monies paid per capita and the citizens of the City of Pittsburgh to the federal government that is allocated to military spending. The report shall include an analysis of the impact of the military budget on the City's economy in relation to jobs and social services. The mayor shall advertise this analysis in two prominent daily newspapers in the City.j.to take such action as may be necessary to ensure that no inequities exist in any unit of city government and that each unit operates in a manner which provides every citizens full and equal access to government and a like opportunity to render goods and services to the City; andk.to perform other duties and exercise other powers as stated in this charter or assigned by law, ordinance or resolution.
§ 205. - STATE OF THE CITY MESSAGE.
The mayor shall deliver a state of the city message each year in public. The state of the city message may be delivered at the same time as the mayor's budget proposal to council or within three months thereafter.

§ 206. - VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF THE MAYOR.
A vacancy in the mayor's office shall be filled at the next election permitted by law. The person elected shall be a resident of the city of Pittsburgh and shall take office as soon as possible after the certification of election and shall serve the remaining portion of the vacated term.

Until the vacancy is filled by an election, the president of council shall serve as Mayor. If the president of council accepts the position of mayor, he/she shall immediately relinquish his/her position as council member. Council shall then elect a new president of council.

If the president of council shall be unable or unwilling to serve as mayor, a mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of all the members of council. The person elected shall be a resident of the city of Pittsburgh. If a member of council is elected and accepts the position of mayor, he/she shall immediately relinquish his/her position as council member.

§ 207. - DEPUTY MAYOR.
The mayor may appoint a non-elected major administrative unit head to act as deputy mayor while the mayor is necessarily absent from the City or temporarily disabled. The mayor shall file a notice of the appointment in the office of council. The deputy mayor shall have all the powers and discharge all the duties of the mayor during the mayor's absence or temporary disability except the power of appointment or removal. The deputy mayor shall serve without additional compensation and post bond with the controller in an amount approved by council.

§ 208. - ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE.
All units of government, except those mandated by this charter, may be established, revised or abolished by ordinance. Such an ordinance may be introduced by the mayor or council. If the ordinance is introduced by council, council shall immediately notify the mayor, who shall within thirty days of receipt of notice submit a recommendation to council. Council shall take no action on the ordinance until a recommendation is received or the thirty day period expires.

§ 209. - APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF HEADS OF MAJOR ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS.
The mayor shall appoint the heads of all major administrative units subject to approval of council. Unless removed, all major administrative unit heads shall hold office during the term for which the mayor is elected and until their successors are appointed and qualified.

§ 210. - REMOVAL OF HEADS OF MAJOR ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS.
The mayor may remove the head of any major administrative unit at will. A removal shall not be effective until the mayor transmits reasons to council in writing.

§ 211. - INFORMATION REQUIRED OF UNITS OF GOVERNMENT.
All heads of units of government shall furnish the mayor or council such information as the mayor or council shall demand at any reasonable time and shall make an annual public report in writing to the mayor and council.

§ 212. - CITY SOLICITOR.
The mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of council, a city solicitor. The solicitor shall be a major administrative unit head. The city solicitor shall be an attorney qualified to practice law before the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.

§ 213. - DUTIES OF CITY SOLICITOR.
The city solicitor shall:

a.act as attorney for the City as a municipal corporation, for council, and for any city unit of government, except when council or a unit of government authorized to do so by this charter chooses to use its own counsel;b.prepare all contracts to which the City or any of its units is a party; and,c.audit, in connection with the election of the controller, the preliminary account of campaign contributions and expenses required by section 802 of this charter, to publish the results of the audit, and to inform the proper authorities of any violation of law revealed by the audit.
§ 214. - APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF MEMBERS OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
The mayor shall appoint the members of all boards and commissions subject to approval of council. They shall serve for terms as provided by law, this charter or ordinance.

§ 215. - REMOVAL OF MEMBERS OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
The mayor may remove any member of a board or commission at will except as otherwise provided by this charter. A removal shall not be effective until the mayor transmits reasons to council in writing.

§ 216. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION.
The mayor shall appoint a fifteen member human relations commission. Each member shall serve for a term of four years or until a successor is appointed and qualified. The commission shall:

a.investigate complaints of unlawful discrimination against any person in the enjoyment of the civil rights guaranteed by law, this charter or ordinance and secure those rights without discrimination;b.secure the rights of citizens to services from city government without discrimination;c.submit an annual written report to the mayor summarizing the year's activities and making recommendations;d.hold public hearings as necessary to make determinations on all matters within its jurisdiction; and,e.perform other duties and exercise all powers including enforcement powers as conferred by law or ordinance.
§ 217. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION STAFF.
The commission may employ and supervise a staff including a solicitor. The solicitor for the commission shall be an attorney qualified to practice law before the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania. The solicitor shall be responsible to the chief staff officer of the commission and provide legal representation to the commission on legal matters within its jurisdiction.

§ 218. - REMOVAL OF HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION MEMBERS.
The mayor may remove a commission member only for just cause and with the approval of council. The mayor shall submit reasons constituting cause in writing to the commission and council.

§ 219. - APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF MEMBERS OF AUTHORITIES.
The mayor shall appoint all members of authorities subject to approval of council except as otherwise required by law. They shall serve for terms as provided by law.

§ 220. - COMPOSITION OF AUTHORITY BOARDS.
A member of council shall serve on each authority board. However, no member of council may serve on more than one authority board at the same time.

§ 221. - REMOVAL OF AUTHORITY MEMBERS.
The mayor may remove any member of an authority at will except as otherwise provided by law. A removal shall not be effective until the mayor transmits reasons to council in writing.

§ 222. - VACANCIES ON AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
Should the mayor fail to nominate a person to fill any vacancy, however created, on any authority, board or commission within sixty days after an office becomes vacant, council may fill the vacancy unless prohibited by law.

§ 223. - APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF MAGISTRATES.
The mayor shall appoint city magistrates subject to approval of council. They shall serve for terms of four years. However, the initial terms of magistrates appointed following adoption of this charter shall be staggered so that their appointment is distributed over four year periods as evenly as possible. If the mayor fails to nominate a person to fill a city magistrate's position within 60 days after the expiration of a magistrate's term, the name of the person currently holding that magisterial position shall, upon the person's consent, automatically be re-nominated for an additional term.

§ 224. - CHIEF MAGISTRATE - STAFF.
The mayor shall designate one magistrate to serve as chief magistrate. The chief magistrate shall employ and supervise a staff which shall be responsible to the chief magistrate. The chief magistrate shall be responsible for the scheduling of cases, assigning magistrates to various courts and maintaining proper decorum in court at all times.

§ 225. - REMOVAL OF MAGISTRATES.
Magistrates may be removed as provided by law and this charter.

§ 226. - ORGANIZATION AND JURISDICTION OF MAGISTRATE COURTS.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter or by ordinance, the organization, jurisdiction, powers, procedures and practices of the magistrate courts shall be in accordance with the law.

§ 227. - TABLE OF ORGANIZATION.
The executive branch shall file a table of organization in the office of city clerk. The table of organization shall be kept current at all times and shall be available for inspection by the public during regular work hours.

§ 228. - INDEPENDENT CITIZEN REVIEW BOARD.
There is established an Independent Citizen Review Board, comprised of seven members reflecting Pittsburgh's diversity, for the purpose of receiving, investigating and recommending appropriate action on complaints regarding police misconduct and for the purpose of improving the relationship between the police department and the community. The members shall serve four year staggered terms and serve until the appointment of their successors. Four of the seven appointments shall be made from a list of nine nominations submitted to the Mayor by City Council. Members shall be residents of the City, shall not be employed by the City or any of its Authorities, and shall serve without compensation.

§ 229. - POWERS OF INDEPENDENT CITIZEN REVIEW BOARD.
The Board shall:

a.Receive all complaints related to the conduct of any sworn member of the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police and shall investigate selected complaints filed by individuals alleging police misconduct;b.Establish a mediation program pursuant to which a complainant may voluntarily choose to resolve a complaint by means of informal conciliation;c.Provide advice and recommendations to the Mayor and the Chief of Police on policies and actions of the Police Bureau, including recommendations on police training, hiring and disciplinary policies and specific recommendations of discipline for individual officers; provided, however, the Mayor and the Chief of Police shall retain full and ultimate authority to set disciplinary policies or take other actions deemed appropriate relative to the Police Bureau.d.Hold public hearings, subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance, administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath and in connection therewith require the production of evidence relating to any other matter under investigation or any questions before the board and do all other things necessary to fulfill its purpose.e.The Board shall employ and supervise a staff including a solicitor, as necessary. The Board shall adopt procedures and rules necessary to fulfill its purpose.f.City Council may by ordinance adopt regulations to effectuate this Charter provision.g.With the Controller, jointly conduct performance audits of the Bureau of Police or its successor, notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, whenever the Board and the Controller decide such joint performance audits are necessary.h.Be subject to fiscal audits by the City Controller whenever the Controller decides it is necessary.i.The Board and the Commission on Human Relations, its adjuncts or successors, shall develop protocols necessary to assure complaints alleging unlawful discriminatory conduct by sworn police officers are referred to the Commission on Human Relations for evaluation and disposition if the Commission finds probable cause to proceed.
(Ord. No. 22-2020, § 1, ref. of 11-3-20, eff. 7-22-20)

§ 230. - RESPONSE TO RECOMMENDATIONS OF INDEPENDENT CITIZEN REVIEW BOARD.
a.All officers and employees of the Bureau of Police, the Department of Public Safety, and the Office of Municipal Investigation, adjuncts or successors, shall participate in all investigations conducted by the Independent Citizen Review Board as required by the Board.1.This participation includes production of all officer statements and witness statements.2.The failure of any police officer to do so shall constitute just cause for discharge.b.Neither the Chief, Director of Public Safety, their successors nor the Mayor shall render a final disciplinary decision regarding an act of police misconduct subject to an active investigation by the Board until the Board submits its findings and recommendations to them. The foregoing shall not apply where the Board is unable to comply with the timing requirements applicable to the City by law or to ensure the public safety. Within thirty (30) days of submission of a recommendation by the Board to the Mayor and the Chief of Police, they shall respond in writing as to whether such recommendations are accepted, rejected or will be implemented with modifications.
(Ord. No. 22-2020, § 1, ref. of 11-3-20, eff. 7-22-20)

§ 231. - REMOVAL OF INDEPENDENT CITIZEN REVIEW BOARD MEMBERS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter the mayor may remove a Board member only for just cause as provided herein. The Mayor shall notify the Board and City Council, detailing the findings of cause. If the Mayor recommends removal, unless City Council, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote, disapproves this finding within ten (10) days of notification, the recommendation of the Mayor shall be final, and the Mayor shall cause the member's removal.

ARTICLE 3 - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH

§ 301. - THE COUNCIL.
The legislative power of the City shall be vested in a council.

§ 302. - COMPOSITION.
Council shall consist of nine members. All members shall be elected by districts. Each of the districts shall be represented by one member who shall reside in that district.

§ 303. - QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
A council member shall have been a resident of his or her respective district one year next before his or her election, unless absent on the public business of the United States or this Commonwealth, and shall reside in said district of the City while serving as a council member.

§ 304. - TERMS.
Council members shall serve for a term of four years from the first Monday of January following their election. Terms of council members shall be staggered so that four are elected at the same time as the mayor.

§ 305. - ORGANIZATION OF COUNCIL.
Council shall organize on the first Monday of January following each municipal election. At its organization meeting, council shall, by a majority vote of all council members, elect one member to serve as president for the ensuing legislative term of council. Council shall have the power to remove the president by a 2/3 majority vote in the event of misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard. Council shall fill any vacancy in the office of President by a like vote.

§ 306. - POWERS OF COUNCIL PRESIDENT.
The powers of the council president shall be:

a.to preside at all meetings of council and to refer all proposed legislation to the proper committee;b.to establish and appoint all committees of council and appoint the chairperson of all committees;c.to dissolve a committee at any time;d.to schedule public hearings of council and preside at them;e.to endorse all rules adopted for the government of council; and,f.to perform other duties which council may assign to the office.
§ 307. - COMMITTEES.
The president of council shall promptly following election appoint any necessary committees. Committees shall be composed of at least three members, who shall serve for the term of the council president unless the committee is earlier dissolved by the president. All members of council may attend and participate in committee meetings, but only committee members shall be permitted a vote.

§ 308. - PROHIBITIONS.
Members of council shall not:

a.hold any office, position or employment in any corporation holding or applying for franchises from the City;b.have a personal or private interest in any legislation proposed or pending before council, unless they;1.disclose the fact to council; and,2.refrain from voting or participating in the discussion of the matter;c.hold any other office, position or employment in the government of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the City of Pittsburgh or Allegheny County; except:1.officer of member in the federal reserve;2.officer or member in the National Guard of Pennsylvania; or3.member of any authority as limited by section 220. Members of council who violate any of the above provisions shall immediately forfeit their office.
§ 309. - VACANCIES.
A vacancy on Council shall be filled in a special election within one hundred twenty (120) days of the filing of a Writ of Election.

Within three (3) calendar days of the death, resignation, or removal of a Member of Council, the Council President shall instruct the City Clerk to issue a Writ of Election.

The Clerk shall issue the Writ of Election within four (4) calendar days for a special election to be held within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the writ,

Providing that:

The Writ of Election shall not be issued on the day of a primary, municipal or general election.

A Writ of Election shall not be issued less than sixty (60) days prior to primary, municipal or general election.

A Writ of Election issued to fill a vacancy occurring less than one-hundred (120) days but more than fifty-nine (59) days prior to a primary, municipal or general election shall direct that the special election shall coincide with said primary, municipal, or general election.

The special election shall be held on any day other than a weekend or an official federal, state, or local holiday.

The person elected shall take office as soon as possible after certification of election and shall serve the unexpired portion of the vacated term.

§ 310. - POWERS OF COUNCIL.
Council shall have the following additional powers:

a.to employ or retain its own staff and consultants including a city clerk and an attorney qualified to practice law before the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, who may act as legal advisor to council, and may represent council as a body in legal proceedings. Council's attorney shall not represent the City as a municipal corporation in any legal proceeding;b.to conduct investigations in accordance with the provisions of this charter;c.to approve appointments as provided by this charter, except as otherwise mandated by law;d.to exercise the power of removal as provided by this charter;e.to override the veto of the mayor by a two-thirds vote of all the members;f.to call a meeting at any time between council and the mayor jointly to discuss legislation or the business of the City in general, and to compel the attendance of the mayor at a council hearing;g.to authorize the sale of city services outside the City so long as services to the City are not impaired;h.to fix, by resolution, the salary of all elected city officials, but no elected city official shall receive a salary increase that exceed the average percentage of increase in salaries and wages paid to all city employees as based on the previous year's salary. Further, the salary paid to elected city officeholders shall not be diminished during their term of office.i.to exercise other powers conferred by this charter, by law or ordinance, consistent with the provisions of this charter.
§ 311. - REMOVAL POWER.
Council shall have the power to remove from office for cause any person appointed to office with the required approval of council. Commission of any corrupt act or practice, malfeasance, or the willful commission of any fraud upon the City shall constitute cause for removal. Council shall give any person charged due notice and an opportunity to be heard. Removal shall be effective upon passage of a resolution which receives the affirmative vote of a majority of all council members.

§ 312. - INVESTIGATIONS.
Council shall have the power, by resolution, to authorize investigations to be conducted by council or by a committee of council. Investigations may deal with legislative or administrative matters. The subject of the investigation shall be stated in the resolution authorizing the investigation. Council may reopen the budget to provide funds for the investigation. The presiding officer of council or the committee shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses.

§ 313. - PUBLIC MEETINGS.
Council and its committees shall exercise its powers only at meetings which shall be open for public attendance.

§ 314. - ROLL CALL VOTES.
All final action in adopting legislation shall be by roll call vote, and the vote of each member of council shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting.

§ 315. - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
Council shall conduct and hold meetings at which legislation may be introduced and passed at least fifty weeks during the calendar year.

§ 316. - LEGISLATION.
Council may legislate by ordinance or resolution. Ordinances shall deal with general rules of continuing effect. Resolutions shall deal with specific matters such as authorization of contracts, salaries, appropriations and budget transfers. All ordinances and resolutions introduced shall be kept in a place accessible to the public at all reasonable times.

§ 317. - LEGISLATION REQUIREMENTS IN GENERAL.
Every ordinance shall have a title clearly expressing its subject. Every ordinance and resolution shall contain only one main subject, shall contain the date of its enactment and shall be signed by the presiding officer of the meeting at which final action is taken. Failure of the presiding officer to sign an ordinance or resolution shall not in any way invalidate an otherwise valid ordinance or resolution.

§ 318. - TIME AND NOTICE REQUIRED BETWEEN INTRODUCTION AND FINAL PASSAGE OF LEGISLATION.
Council shall not take final action on any legislation until a minimum of seven days has elapsed from the date of its introduction, unless council finds and declares that an urgent reason exists requiring earlier final action. Council shall give public notice of the introduction of legislation within twenty-four hours after it is introduced. Notice shall consist of posting the proposed legislation or its title in a conspicuous public place readily observable by citizens entering the building occupied by council and also by posting in the office of the city clerk.

§ 319. - LEGISLATION REQUIRING PRIOR PUBLIC HEARING.
Council shall not take final action on the following types of legislation without a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days following public notice published in a newspaper circulated generally in the City:

a.salary;b.appropriation or budget matter;c.land use control, such as zoning, subdivision or planning;d.new taxes or increases in the rate of existing taxes;e.creation of an authority or quasi-public agency;f.increase in the amount making a sealed bid procedure unnecessary on contracts; org.election of all council members at large or by district.
§ 320. - CITIZENS RIGHT TO BE HEARD.
Council shall grant a public hearing to residents of the City:

a.on pending legislation, if they deliver a petition requesting a public hearing to the city clerk o later than three days, after notice of the introduction of the proposed legislation, signed by at least twenty-five qualified electors who reside in the City which includes a statement that all petitioners intend to attend the public hearing. Council shall not vote on the proposed legislation until a public hearing is held in response to a properly submitted petition.b.on any matter other than pending legislation providing they deliver a petition meeting all of the above requirements to the city clerk. Council shall schedule the public hearing within a reasonable time after the petition is received by the city clerk.
§ 321. - SUBMISSION OF LEGISLATION TO MAYOR AND VETO POWER.
Council shall submit all proposed legislation to the mayor for approval prior to its effective date. The mayor shall sign the legislation within ten days if approved, but if not, shall return it to council stating objections. Council, at its next meeting, shall reconsider any legislation disapproved by the mayor and may pass it in spite of the mayor's disapproval by a two-thirds vote of all the members. If the mayor fails to sign or return legislation to council with reasons for disapproval, it shall become law as of its effective date, ten days after submission to the mayor. The mayor may disapprove any item in the operating budget or capital budget, subject to reconsideration by council in the same manner as other legislation.

§ 322. - PUBLICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEGISLATION.
The effective date of an ordinance or resolution shall be the date or recording in the permanent ordinance or resolution record book. Provided, however, that the effective date may be a later date if specifically provided in the ordinance or resolution. Within thirty days after passage, the title or a general summary of each ordinance, conditional use and historic preservation resolution shall be published once in a newspaper circulating generally within the City.

§ 323. - RECORDING OF LEGISLATION.
All ordinances and resolutions shall be contained verbatim in permanent separate record books. However, any ordinance may incorporate by reference any standard technical regulation or code or part thereof provided that at least one copy is kept with the permanent record books. The ordinance book and resolution book shall be open and available for inspection by the public during regular business hours.

§ 324. - CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
Within two years after the effective date of this charter, the city solicitor shall review all general ordinances of the City and submit recommendations to council for change or repeal. The city solicitor shall also submit a proposed city code to council for adoption based on the review and recommendations. Following adoption of the code, council shall, with the assistance of the city solicitor, classify all proposed ordinances for inclusion in the code.

§ 325. - PUBLICATION OF CODE AND CHARTER.
Council, after approval, shall publish the city code. Council shall at least annually thereafter publish supplements to the code. Council shall make the code and its supplements available for distribution to any interested citizen. Council shall supply a copy of the city's charter upon request without charge to any citizen of the City.

ARTICLE 4 - CONTROLLER

§ 401. - CREATION OF OFFICE.
There shall be an office of controller.

§ 402. - QUALIFICATIONS OF THE CONTROLLER.
The controller shall have been a resident of the City for at least three years immediately preceding election, unless absent on the public business of the United States or this Commonwealth, and shall reside in the City while serving as controller.

§ 403. - ELECTION AND TERM.
The controller shall be chosen by the qualified electors of the City at a non-mayoralty municipal election. The controller shall serve for a term of four years from the first Monday of January following election until a successor is elected and qualified.

§ 404. - POWERS AND DUTIES.
The controller shall have the following powers and duties:

a.to inspect, revise and prescribe the form of reports and accounts of council, all units of government and trusts;b.to audit the accounts of council, units of government and all agencies and trusts;c.to conduct performance audits of all agencies, trusts, council and units of government whenever the controller decides it is necessary or is directed to conduct such an audit either by the mayor or by council, but in any event no less than once every four years;d.to submit an annual verified report to council showing revenues, receipts and expenditures; the sources from which the revenues and funds are derived and how they have been disbursed no later than May 1 of each year. All agencies, trusts and units of government shall comply in a timely manner to requests from the Controller's Office for financial records, statements and any other information required to complete the audit;e.to conduct at least once each fiscal year an audit of the annual inventory required by the charter and submit a verified report of the audit to council and the mayor;f.to keep separate accounts for each item or appropriation for council and each unit of government and require all warrants to state specifically against which item the warrant is drawn;g.to accompany each account by a statement in detail of each appropriation, the amount drawn on each appropriation, the unpaid contracts charged against it and the balance outstanding;h.to make certain that no appropriation is overdrawn and that no appropriation for one item is used for any other purpose or by any unit of government other than that authorized;i.to make certain that sufficient funds from which the warrant is payable are actually on hand; andj.to audit, except for election of the controller, preliminary accounts of campaign contributions and expenses required in section 802 of this charter; the controller shall publish the results of these audits and inform the proper authorities of any violation of law revealed by the audit.
§ 405. - NOTICE OF DISAPPROVAL.
No warrant shall be paid unless approved by the controller. If any warrant presented to the controller is disapproved for any reason the controller shall notify the appropriate official.

§ 406. - LIABILITY.
The controller and all sureties shall be jointly and severally liable if a warrant is approved contrary to law, this charter, ordinance or resolutions.

§ 407. - EXAMINATION OF CLAIMS.
The controller may require evidence that the amount of a claim is justly due and for that purpose may summon any officer, agent or employee of any unit of government or any other person and examine them under oath or affirmation.

§ 408. - MONTHLY STATEMENTS.
Council and each unit of government shall provide detailed statements of receipts and expenditures to the controller on the third Monday of each month.

§ 409. - AUDIT OF OFFICER'S ACCOUNT.
The controller shall audit the accounts of all elected officials and officers upon their death, resignation, removal from office or expiration of their term and at the end of each fiscal year. If an elected official or officer should be indebted to the City, the controller shall take appropriate legal action to secure repayment of the indebtedness.

§ 410. - DEPUTY CONTROLLER.
The controller shall appoint a deputy controller who in case of a vacancy in the office or the illness, absence or inability of the controller to act shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as the controller.

§ 411. - SOLICITOR.
The controller may appoint a solicitor who shall hold office at the pleasure of the controller and shall be an attorney qualified to practice law before the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania. The solicitor shall act as legal adviser to the controller and shall at the controller's request represent the controller in any litigation involving that office.

ARTICLE 5 - BUDGET AND FISCAL MATTERS

§ 501. - FISCAL YEAR.
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of January and end on the last day of December on each year unless changed by ordinance.

§ 502. - OPERATING AND CAPITAL BUDGET.
There shall be an annual balanced operating budget and an annual capital budget.

§ 503. - FORM OF OPERATING BUDGET.
The proposed operating budget shall be a line item budget or another type of budget authorized by ordinance and shall contain sufficient information on intended accomplishments to allow adequate appraisal of the work of each unit of government during the fiscal year.

§ 504. - PREPARATION OF OPERATING AND CAPITAL BUDGETS.
The operating and capital budgets shall be prepared by the mayor. The mayor or a representative of the mayor shall conduct public hearings to obtain the advice of other officials and citizens as part of the preparation of both budgets. The mayor shall, at least ten days in advance of the commencement of public hearings, provide notice of the time and place of the hearings by publication in a newspaper circulated generally in the City.

§ 505. - PRESENTATION AND ADOPTION OF BUDGETS.
On the second Monday of the eleventh month of each fiscal year, the mayor shall present both proposed budgets to council with a message explaining them. Council shall adopt by resolution an operating budget and a capital budget before the end of each fiscal year.

§ 506. - EFFECT OF BUDGET ADOPTION.
The adoption of the capital or operating budget shall constitute an appropriation or setting apart of funds from general resources of the City for the purpose set forth in the budget.

§ 507. - AMENDMENT OF BUDGET.
Council may amend by resolution the operating budget within five weeks after the close of the fiscal year, but not thereafter except with the approval of the mayor. Council at all times may by resolution transfer funds from one code account to another if the total budget amount is not exceeded. The operating budget shall, in any event, remain balanced at all times. The capital budget may by resolution be amended by council at any time.

§ 508. - CAPITAL PROGRAM.
The capital budget shall be based on a proposed six year capital program which shall be updated each year and submitted to council by the mayor at least thirty days prior to the day the capital budget is submitted.

§ 509. - JOINT TAX COLLECTION.
The city may cooperate and join with other governments in collecting taxes.

§ 510. - CONTRACTS.
Every contract relating to city affairs shall be authorized by resolution of council. No contract shall be entered into or executed directly by council or any committee of council.

§ 511. - COMPETITIVE BIDS.
All contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder except:

a.purchases at public sale or governed by tariffs on file with Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission;b.contracts for personal or professional services;c.contracts with political subdivision, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States Government, or any quasi-public agency or authority; ord.purchases of personal property where by reason of patents or copyrights the required type of item is available from only one seller.
§ 512. - BIDDING PROCEDURE.
Unless the amount is increased by ordinance, each contract subject to competitive bids exceeding two thousand dollars shall be awarded by sealed bid procedure. Invitations for bids shall include reasonable public notice by advertisement in a newspaper circulated generally in the City. All bids shall be filed sealed in the controller's office and shall be opened for the first time and announced publicly at the time and place designated in the notice. Unless the amount is increased by ordinance, a contract subject to competitive bids involving two thousand dollars or less may be awarded on oral or letter bids, or on specific prices set forth in the seller's literature.

§ 513. - ENFORCEABILITY OF CONTRACTS.
No contract entered into by the city after the effective date of this charter shall be enforceable in any manner against the City unless the contract is in compliance with law and the provisions of this charter. However, council, by resolution approved by two-thirds of its members and the mayor, may authorize payment of a claim for services rendered or materials furnished in reliance on contracts made by city officers or agents in good faith without authority or in excess of authority so long as the contract could have been properly authorized.

§ 514. - WAIVER OF PERFORMANCE.
Council, by ordinance, may establish standards for the waiver of any performance bond required of a contractor provided that the contractor is responsible and pays to the City upon award of the contract an amount equal to the prevailing premium rates. All payments shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.

§ 515. - DESIGNATION OF EMPLOYEES IN COVERED CONTRACTS.
Thirty-five percent (35%) of all employee works hours performed under Covered Contracts shall be performed by City residents.

Covered Contracts are construction contracts exceeding $200,000 where the City is a party, funded by City or non-City funds.

The City shall encourage employment goals consistent with its current equal opportunity practices.

§ 516. - ESTABLISHMENT OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITY REVIEW COMMISSION.
Council shall, by ordinance, designate and establish an Equal Opportunity Review Commission, enumerating its powers and duties, to review and approve construction contracts and contractors' compliance with city policies regarding minority and women participation.

ARTICLE 6 - COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS

§ 601. - DESIGNATION OF COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARD DISTRICTS.
Within one year after the effective date of this charter, the mayor shall submit to council a recommended division of the City into community advisory board districts for the purpose of establishing community advisory boards. The division shall be in accordance with the following criteria:

a.In designing districts, the mayor shall consider areas of the City recognized as neighborhoods because of historical, geographic or other factors.b.Each community advisory board district shall consist of an entire voting district or contiguous undivided voting districts.
Council may reject or adopt the mayor's recommendations but shall adopt, by ordinance, only a division recommended by the mayor.

§ 602. - ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS.
Council shall, by ordinance, designate and establish a community advisory board, after receipt of a petition for establishment of a community advisory board for a district designated by ordinance under section 601 which is signed by the qualified electors residing within the district at least equal to ten percent of those who voted in the last preceding municipal election.

§ 603. - ORGANIZATION OF A COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARD.
An ordinance establishing a community advisory board shall prescribe its organization, including the number of board members and other offices as stated in a general ordinance adopted in accordance with this section. Various community advisory boards may have different number of members, and community advisory board districts may contain differing populations, but throughout the City each elected member of a community advisory board shall represent approximately the same number of residents of a community advisory board district. Following each federal census, the mayor shall promptly review each community advisory board district and recommend changes to council in the number of elected members of community advisory boards needed to maintain equality. Council shall then amend the appropriate community advisory board ordinance so that equality is maintained in this regard. In addition to elected members, each community advisory board shall have delegated board members appointed or elected by community organizations of the district. The number of delegated board members and the recognition of community organizations shall be as stated in the general ordinance, which shall also provide for periodic review of the recognition of community organizations. A delegated board member shall have a vote equal to that of an elected board member.

§ 604. - ELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARD MEMBERS.
Each elected member of a community advisory board shall be chosen at a municipal election to serve for a term of two years. An elected member shall take office on the first Monday of January following the election. No member of a community advisory board shall have held, with the year immediately preceding commencement of a term, any other elected position with the city, county or state governments. No person who was a candidate for city or county office may be a member of a community advisory board until after the expiration of one year following the election in which that person was a candidate. Elected community advisory board members shall reside in the community board district which they serve.

§ 605. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS.
The powers and duties of each community advisory board shall be:

a.to review and advise council and the mayor on proposed zoning changes in the district;b.to review and advise council and the mayor on the social and physical plans for the district;c.to review and advise council and the mayor on the distribution of city services to the district;d.to meet annually with the mayor and council to discuss problems, needs and public affairs of the districts;e.to mandate, by a majority vote of all its members, a meeting within two weeks with the appropriate head of a major administrative unit of the City to discuss a specific district problem.
Council may, by ordinance, give additional powers and duties to community advisory boards. Each community advisory board shall hold public meetings, after reasonable public notice within the district, not less than four times each year to afford an opportunity to district residents to make known their views and needs.

§ 606. - PROCEDURES OF COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS.
Council shall, by general ordinance, prescribe procedures for the exercise of the powers and duties of community advisory boards.

§ 607. - FUNDS AND EXPENSES OF COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS.
Community advisory boards shall receive no grants from city tax funds and community advisory board members shall serve without compensation. Community advisory boards may, however, accept donations and grants from any other source.

§ 608. - REVISION OF COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS.
Council may, upon receipt of a petition with signatures as required in section 602, amend the appropriate ordinance to revise the organization and procedures of a community advisory board. District boundaries shall be revised only as provided by section 601.

§ 609. - DISSOLUTION OF COMMUNITY ADVISORY BOARDS.
Council may, by ordinance, dissolve all community advisory boards as of the end of any fiscal year. A particular community advisory board shall be dissolved only by a petition signed by the same number of qualified electors residing in the community advisory board district required by section 602 and an ordinance adopted after a public hearing by council with public notice to that community advisory board district.

ARTICLE 7 - PERSONNEL

§ 701 - HUMAN RESOURCES SYSTEM.
The mayor shall propose a personnel system to council for approval and adoption by ordinance. The system shall be uniform for all employees. It shall include written procedures for appointment, promotion and removal based on merit and fitness as demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence, with due consideration for seniority, insofar as permitted by law. Appointments, promotions and removals of subordinate officers and employees within major administrative units shall be made by the major administrative unit head on the basis of the system adopted. The right of collective bargaining for employees is recognized in accordance with law.

(Ord. No. 43-2017, § 1, eff. 12-1-17)

§ 702. - APPEALS BOARD.
The personnel system shall include an appeals board which, unless changed by ordinance, shall consist of three persons: one appointed by the mayor, one by council and one by the controller. Appeals board members shall be removed only for just cause and with the approval of two of the three appointing authorities.

(Ord. No. 43-2017, § 2, eff. 12-1-17)

§ 703. - AGE RESTRICTIONS.
No person who has reached the age of eighteen shall be denied employment by the City because of age.

§ 704. - RECRUITMENT.
In order that every eligible citizen of Pittsburgh has the opportunity of being employed by the City, council and all units of government shall recruit for employment, persons from every sector of the City's population, with special effort towards the recruitment of women, handicapped persons and persons from disadvantaged minority groups until such time as the human relations commission finds that no city resident is denied employment for any other reason than inability to perform the job sought.

§ 705. - POLITICAL ACTIVITY OF EMPLOYEES - GIFTS.
Employees of the City are prohibited from engaging in political activity during working hours and at all times in city offices. City employees may not hold an elected public office wherein they would receive an annual salary, unless a leave of absence is taken without pay. Certain described classes of city employees and officers may be required, by ordinance, to take a leave of absence without pay while a candidate for elected public office. City employees shall not be permitted to accept any gift or thing of value in connection with their employment other than their salary, nor be compelled to contribute to any fund other than that required by law. No solicitation shall be made of a city employee for any purpose during working hours. Nothing contained in this section shall affect the right of city employees to support a political party, to vote as they choose, to hold party office or to express publicly and privately their opinions on political subjects and to attend political meetings.

§ 706. - PROHIBITIONS IN GENERAL.
No elected official, officer or employee shall in any manner receive benefit from the profits or emoluments of any contract, job work or service for the City, or accept any service or thing of value directly or indirectly upon more favorable terms than those granted to the public generally, from any person, firm or corporation having dealings with the City. No elected official, officer, or employee shall solicit or receive any compensation, gratuity or other thing for any act done in the course of public work. This section shall be broadly construed and strictly enforced. Any violation of this section shall cause the offending official, officer, or employee to forfeit office or employment.

§ 707. - MULTIPLE EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITED.
No person shall hold more than one compensated position in City government and no compensated city employee shall hold a compensated position in any other government except as follows:

a.officer or member of the Pennsylvania National Guard or federal reserve:b.the controller may also serve as controller for the city school district; and the deputy controller may also serve as deputy controller for the city school district.c.a treasurer, or person serving in that capacity, may also serve as treasurer for the city school district.d.member or employee of any sinking fund commission or pension board.e.Pittsburgh public school employees between the months of May and September of each year.f.part-time athletic coaches in a public school system.g.part-time educational positions at public institutions of higher learning.
For each exception the Department of Personnel shall develop a strict multiple employment policy and enforcement procedure to ensure employee integrity and compliance.

(Ord. No. 36-2017, § 1, ref. 11-7-17, eff. 11-27-17)

§ 708. - POLITICAL OFFICIALS - CIVIL SERVICE GRADE.
Any police officer appointed to a higher position exempt from tenure protection, other than the position of police chief or its equivalent from a position having tenure protection, shall, in the event or subsequent removal from the higher position, retain the tenure right in the former position.

§ 709. - OATH OF OFFICE.
Every elected official and officer and every appointee before commencing official duties shall take and subscribe the following oath: "I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of this state and the charter of this City and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of office to the best of my ability," and shall file this oath duly certified before the officer before whom it was taken, in the office of council.

§ 710. - ETHICS TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.
Every elected official and every public official and public employee required to file a Statement of Financial Interests shall be provided a copy of the Pennsylvania Ethics Act and supporting material upon his or her assumption of office or upon his or her initial appointment and every elected official and every public official and public employee required to file a Statement of Financial Interests shall attend a seminar provided by the Pennsylvania Ethics Commission within ninety (90) days of his or her assumption of office or his or her initial appointments as soon thereafter as practicable.

§ 711. - RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL CITY EMPLOYEES.
All City employees and officials, including Police and Fire Bureau personnel, shall be domiciled in the City at the time of their initial appointment and shall continuously maintain their domicile within the City throughout their terms of employment with the city.

ARTICLE 8 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

§ 801. - DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS.
All elected officials of the City shall, on or before January 15, of every year during their term of office, file a disclosure, as of January 1 of that year, with the controller, which shall be available for public inspection and shall contain the following information:

a.the names of all business or non-profit corporations, associations, partnership, joint ventures, estates, proprietorships, trusts business activities and organizations, other than religious organizations and religious corporations:1.with which the official has any connection as an owner, officer, employee, consultant, contractor, creditor, shareholder, member, partner, joint venture, trustee, beneficiary or participant; or2.in which the official has any financial or property interest in any form, whether a legal interest or equitable interest or otherwise: stating as to each name, the nature of the connection or interest:b.a brief description of all legal and equitable interests of any degree in real property held by the official;c.a statement of the remaining amounts of any funds and contributions related to the officials most recent nomination and election, and by whom and how held; andd.the names of all creditors of the official and debts as to which the official is co-signer, surety or guarantor in excess of $1,000.
§ 802. - CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND EXPENSES.
In connection with every election city office, each candidate for nomination or election, and every treasurer of a political committee or person acting as treasurer, shall file a public preliminary account or receipts and expenses five days prior to the election. The preliminary account shall be in the same form and contain the same information as required by law to be filed following an election except that the information shall be provided as of a time seven days prior to election.

§ 803. - VACANCIES.
The office of any elected official shall become vacant upon death, resignation or upon removal from office in any manner authorized by law or this charter or upon forfeiture or failure for any reason to assume office within forty-five days after commencement of the term.

§ 804. - FORFEITURE OF OFFICE.
Elected officials of the City shall forfeit their office if they:

a.at any time during their term lack any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law, orb.are convicted of first degree murder or felony of the first or second degree as set forth in the penal code of this Commonwealth and all appellate remedies exhausted, orc.falsify or fail to make an annual disclosure of interests as required by section 801 of this charter, ord.falsify or fail to make a preliminary account of campaign contributions and expenses as required by section 802 of this charter.
§ 805. - PENALTIES.
Council shall by ordinance, determine the penalty for any violation of any provision of this charter except where the charter expressly provides a penalty.

§ 806. - GROUNDS FOR REMOVAL -IMPEACHMENT.
Every elected official or officer pursuant to impeachment proceedings may be impeached, suspended or removed from office in the event of mental incapacity, incompetency, neglect of duty malfeasance, mismanagement or for any corrupt act or practice.

§ 807. - IMPEACHMENT PROCEEDING.
Impeachment proceedings may be initiated by presentation of a written petition to the Court of Common Pleas signed by at least twenty qualified electors who reside in the City. If in the opinion of the court, reasonable grounds are set forth in the petition, the court shall appoint a citizen investigating committee to make a written report to the court. If the committee reports the charges well founded, council shall sit as a court and the president judge of the Court of Common Pleas shall preside. Except in cases where the city solicitor or the mayor is accused, the city solicitor shall act as prosecuting attorney. If the City solicitor or the mayor is accused, or the city solicitor is unable to serve as prosecuting attorney, the solicitor for the controller shall act as prosecuting attorney. The decision shall be filed in the Court of Common Pleas. If the accused is found guilty of any charge specified, the court shall enter an appropriate judgment and declare the accused's office vacant.

§ 808. - SUBPOENA POWER.
In any case where an elected official, officer, or unit of government has the power to conduct public hearings the elected official, officer or unit of government shall the authority to issue subpoenas for the attendance of witness and to compel testimony and the production of documents and other evidence. The subpoena shall issue in the name of the City and shall be signed by the elected official, officer or presiding officer of the unit of government. Any witness who refuses to obey a subpoena, or who refuses to testify under oath or affirmation, may be cited for contempt in any Court of Common Pleas having jurisdiction.

§ 809. - ANNUAL INVENTORY.
The executive branch shall conduct and maintain an annual inventory of all city property which shall be readily accessible to all units of government.

§ 810. - PUBLIC RIGHT TO INSPECT RECORDS.
City records, the disclosure of which would invade a person's right to privacy, hinder law enforcement, endanger the public safety, or breach a legally recognized duty or confidence or the nondisclosure of which is legally privileged, or which have been prepared for or by the city solicitor for use in actions or proceedings to which the City is or may be a party, shall not be available for public inspection. All other city records shall be open for public inspection, but the officer, unit head, board or commission or other governmental agency of the City having the care and custody of such records may make reasonable regulations governing the time, place and manner of their inspection. For the purposes of preservation, copies of city records may be substituted for inspection in lieu of original records.

§ 811. - SEVERABILITY.
In the event this charter cannot take effect in its entirety because of the judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction holding invalid any provision, the remaining provisions of the charter shall be given full force and effect as completely as if the provision held invalid were not included.

§ 812. - EFFECT OF CHARTER ON EXISTING LAWS.
Subject to pertinent enabling legislation authorizing a home rule charter, this charter shall supersede any existing charter and all acts or parts of acts, local special or general and all ordinances and resolutions of the City to the extent that they are inconsistent or in conflict with this charter. All existing acts of parts of acts and ordinances affecting the organization, government and powers of the City, not inconsistent or in conflict with this charter shall remain in full force and shall be construed as if enacted under this charter, but as of the date of their original enactment. No contract existing on the effective date of this charter shall be affected by it. Council by ordinance or resolution may supersede any act of the general assembly insofar as permitted by pertinent enabling legislation and this charter.

§ 813. - EFFECTIVE DATE AND SCHEDULE.
This charter shall become effective on the first Monday of January 1976, except in the following particulars:

a.Members of council shall be elected in 1975 under the provisions of this charter, and for that purpose all sections of this charter relating to election of members of council shall become effective immediately upon the adoption of this charter by the electors.b.Council seats filled in the 1973 municipal election which become vacant for any reason after the adoption of this charter shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this charter except for the first vacancy which shall remain unfilled.c.Appropriations shall be made for the year 1976 so as to implement fully the provisions of this charter. Council shall as promptly as possible adopt any legislation necessary to implement all provisions of this charter.

ARTICLE 9 - PARKS TRUST FUND

§ 901. - ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CITY OF PITTSBURGH PARKS TRUST FUND.
The City of Pittsburgh hereby establishes a Parks Trust Fund dedicated to the following values: improvement, maintenance, creation and operation of public parks; improving park safety; providing equitable funding for parks, including those in underserved neighborhoods throughout the City of Pittsburgh; and securing matching funds and services from a charitable city parks conservancy.

(Ref. of 11-5-19)

§ 902. - FUNDING.
The Parks Trust Fund shall be funded, in part, by adding 0.50 mills to the real estate tax rate that must be approved and set by the Council of the City of Pittsburgh each fiscal year. The Parks Trust Fund may also receive monies and contributions from additional sources, including existing trust funds dedicated to park uses, other funds as determined by the Council of the City of Pittsburgh, private charitable donations, and matching funds from charitable city parks conservancies as further provided in Section 903, in addition to other public and private sources.

(Ref. of 11-5-19)

§ 903. - AGREEMENT WITH CHARITABLE CITY PARKS CONSERVANCIES.
The Mayor may be authorized by City Council to enter into an agreement with one or more charitable city parks conservancies ("Services Agreement(s)") to receive services and to secure matching funds for the Parks Trust Fund. Council may appropriate funds from the Parks Trust Fund for use in the Services Agreement(s). The Services Agreement(s) shall address public participation and disclosure of spending from the Parks Trust Fund in addition to specific terms and conditions for the governance and use of appropriated funds.

(Ref. of 11-5-19)

§ 904. - AUDIT OF PARKS TRUST FUND.
The City Controller shall conduct a financial audit each year of the Parks Trust Fund in accordance with Article IV of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Pittsburgh.

ARTICLE 10 - POWERS OF THE PITTSBURGH POLICE

§ 1001. - NO-KNOCK EXECUTION OF WARRANTS PROHIBITED.
a.When executing any warrant at a residence, a law enforcement officer shall physically knock and announce the presence of police before forcibly entering and shall wait a minimum of 15 seconds to allow the occupants of the residence to respond and open the door.b.When executing any warrant at a residence, a law enforcement officer shall wear a body camera, keep the law enforcement officer's body camera on and record video on the law enforcement officer's body camera:1.When the law enforcement officer conducts a search;2.For a minimum of five minutes before and after the execution of the warrant; and3.During any period that involves a subsequent arrest or search of a person or property.c.When executing any warrant at a residence, a law enforcement officer shall be in uniform or otherwise be wearing clothing that makes the law enforcement officer clearly and immediately identifiable as a law enforcement officer.d.A law enforcement officer who fails to adhere to these standards shall be subject to discipline as provided by Bureau policies and regulation.
